---
layout: post
title: Roth IRA vs 401k
---

So many people hear the terms 401k thrown around when referencing retirement and sometimes you'll hear Roth IRA or IRA or Roth 401k. So what exactly are these? All of theses terms (401k, Roth 401k, IRA, Roth IRA, etc) refer to different accounts that you can open up. Similar to a savings or a checkings bank account. And like savings and checkings bank accounts, each of these have certain stipulations that come with them.

# 401k

The 401k retirement account is one of the most popular retirement account: usually because it's one of the benefits offered by companies. With a 401k account, you can set a percentage or a flat amount to be deducted from your paycheck each pay period. This money will be deposited into your 401k account. Now some of you might be wondering "Why would I do this?", "How's this a benefit?", "Why save when you can go live like you're gonna die young" (Ke\$ha anybody?).

### Why save when you can go live like you're gonna die young?

The reason for contributing to a retirement account is to prepare for retirement that way you aren't having to work until you are lowered into your grave. By starting to save when you are younger, you can use the power of compounding interest in your favor <!-- TODO Add compound interest post -->. With the combination of compounding interest, diligent savings and Social Security (we hope), this should hopefully be enough to support yourself through retirement.

### Why would I do this?

So since the reasoning behind why you should save was answered above, this section will be more focused on the specifics of why the 401k rather than the a savings account or the under the mattress strategy. So the problem with both of these strategies boils down to inflation. Inflation is the nasty little thing that makes your money worth less. Have you ever noticed how your parents will talk about buying gas for a nickel or a dime for a gallon? It's hard to imagine that being the case when gas can be anywhere from $2-$5 a gallon. So while supply and demand is partly due to the increase in prices, it is not the only cause. Inflation is a big contributor to the price increase. The [average inflation rate](https://inflationdata.com/Inflation/Inflation_Rate/Long_Term_Inflation.asp#:~:text=As%20we%20saw%20the%20Average,since%20they%20began%20keeping%20records.) is around 3%. That means your money loses about 3% of it's value every year and you need 3% more every year. For example, if you needed $1.00 to purchase a candy bar in 2020, you'd need the equivalent of $1.03 in 2021 to purchase that same candy bar. _Note_ 3% is the average inflation rate, this could go up or down depending on the year. Now this may not seem too bad right? 3% per year that may seem like nothing at first but remember the power of compounding? Say you begin putting $100/month under your bed starting when you were 20 until you were 65. You would have $54,000 by the time you were 65. Cash money right? Not quite. So with inflation that would mean that money is worth ~378.15958417% less, or the equivalent to \$14,279.69 today. So that's the reason for the 401k retirement. You can place your money in a combination of stocks and bonds that [averages](https://www.investopedia.com/ask/answers/041015/what-rate-return-should-i-expect-my-401k.asp#:~:text=That%20being%20said%2C%20although%20each,from%205%25%20to%208%25.) around 5-8%. So not only can you combat inflation in a 401k account, you can make a little money while doing it too.

### How's this a benefit?

Well is a good enough benefit not paying taxes? Not paying taxes _legally_. With a 401k, you contribute to it pre-tax. Meaning you get to contribute a portion of your income before Uncle Sam gets his share of the pie. That means you can contribute your of your income towards retirement and you pay less taxes. If your income was $40,000, and you contributed 10% of your income ($4,000) to your 401k, then you would have $4,000 in your retirement account, and the government can only tax $36,0000.

Now you said this was a benefit offered by companies and all you've said are stuff that is coming out of my paycheck. Most companies offer what is called 401k matching. Any amount that you contribute towards your 401k account, the companies will match. Usually it will be stated in a bunch of jargon: 25% match up to 10%. The breakdown of this is that your company will match $0.25 of every dollar that you contribute up to 10% of your total salary. So if we take the above example of you contributing $4,000 to your 401k, your company will match $1,000 and contribute that into your account as well. So you've basically gotten $1,000 for free towards your retirement. That's why it's a good idea to try to max out your matching to try to get as much free money as possible.

### This sounds too good to be true

So it is too good to be true. Uncle Sam always wants his share of the pie. However to try to convince people to save for retirement, money isn't taxed going in only coming out. So you will only pay taxes when you withdraw the money during retirement.

### Stipulations for 2020 (Subject to change)

- Max individual contribution is \$19,500/year while under
